Case 37

HISTORY OF PRESENT ILLNESS
The patient is a 21-year-old Caucasian male with a history of poorly controlled Type I diabetes, congenital deafness, and asthma who presented with nausea and vomiting.  The patient has had diabetes since age three.  He was on a one shot per day insulin regimen until approximately two and one-half years prior to admission when he moved form Southern to Northern California.  At that time, his new physician placed him on a BID split dose neutral protein Hagedorn (insulin) and regular insulin regimen.  His compliance has generally been poor.  He has had a rocky course for the past two years with nine admissions to a nearby community hospital.  His first admission was for an asthma exacerbation.  During the hospitalization, he developed severe abdominal pain and underwent an appendectomy.  The appendix was grossly normal at the time of surgery, but the pathology review revealed a small area of acute inflammatory infiltrate.  His post-operative recovery was complicated by an episode of diabetic ketoacidosis.  Over the following one and one-half years, the patient had several admissions for asthma exacerbation and one admission for diabetic ketoacidosis.  He was also hospitalized once with prolonged hypoglycemia after he took his insulin, but could not eat secondary to vomiting.  Three and one-half months prior to admission he was hospitalized after a grand mal seizure which was felt to be secondary to hypoglycemia.  EEG was normal.  The patient had not taken his usual morning insulin dose on the morning of the seizure.

Two weeks before his current admission, the patient was hospitalized with vomiting, dehydration, and diabetic ketoacidosis.  He was found to have right otitis media which was presumed to have triggered his diabetic ketoacidosis.  While hospitalized, the patient's asthma became much worse.  Arterial blood gases deteriorated, and he required intubation.  He was treated with antibiotics, aminophylline, and inhaled beta-agonists as well as receiving intravenous insulin.  He responded well and was extubated after five days.  In the course of his illness, he continued to have vomiting and eventually developed hematemesis.  This was presumed to be secondary to a Mallory-Weiss tear.  An upper GI series was done and showed no evidence of ulceration, but retained secretions were noted in the stomach.  His vomiting eventually resolved with Reglan, and he was able to tolerate a regular diet and his usual insulin regimen.

Shortly after discharge, the patient developed recurrent nausea and vomiting.  Initially he vomited only after meals, but on the day of admission he vomited continuously.  His finger sticks ranged form 280-400.  He continued to take his usual doses of insulin despite being unable to eat due to vomiting.  Two and one-half hours after his evening dose of insulin he became listless and lethargic.  His finger stick was only 40.  The paramedics were called, and they found the patient standing at his sink, diaphoretic and vomiting.  He was given intravenous 50% dextrose after which he felt better.  The patient's parents became concerned because their son's mental status seemed to change.  They felt he was "spaced out" and seemed detached.  He continued to have nausea and vomiting.  He denied fever, chills or sweats, recurrent hematemesis, melena, dyspnea, or cough.  He had noted a 20 lb weight loss over the past three-four weeks.  His parents thought he seemed restless and had slowed mentation.  He denied neck stiffness, blurred vision, or ear pain.

PAST MEDICAL HISTORY
1. Insulin dependent diabetes mellitus for 18 yrs.
2. Deafness secondary to congenital rubella.
3. Asthma for four years.

ALLERGIES
Dystonic reaction with Compazine.

MEDICATIONS
Humulin NPH 20 units/regular 6 units qam, NPH 18 units/ regular
2 units qpm, Theo-Dur 300 mg po bid, Reglan 10 mg po tid.

FAMILY HISTORY
The patient is adopted.

SOCIAL HISTORY
The patient lives with his parents.  He has a fifth grade ability to read and write.  Currently he is taking skill classes at a local community college.  He does not smoke cigarettes.  He does not drink alcohol.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
His temperature is 37.4°C., and his blood pressure is 160/80 mmHg., and his pulse is 96/min., and his respiratory rate is 18/min.  In general, the patient was a short, thin, tanned Caucasian male staring off into space.  Pupils were equal, round, and reactive with sharp discs bilaterally.  There was no evidence of retinopathy.  The right tympanic membrane was bulging, but there was no redness or drainage.  The neck was supple, and no adenopathy was present.  Lungs were clear, and the heart had a regular rhythm with no murmur.  The abdomen had active bowel sounds and was soft and non tender with no hepatosplenomegaly.  Rectal exam revealed no masses and guaiac negative stool.  Neurological exam was remarkable for the patient being deaf.  However, he signed appropriately with his parents and was oriented.  Otherwise, neurological exam was nonfocal.

LABORATORY AND OTHER PROCEDURES
Na 137 mEq/L, K 4.2 mEq/L, Cl 101 mEq/L, HCO3 24 mmol/L, glucose 89 mg/dL, BUN 9 mg/dL, creatinine 0.9 mg/dL.  HCT 44.3%, Hgb 15.5 g/dL, WBC 5,700 cells/μL, platelets 347,000/mm3.  Urinalysis showed specific gravity of 1.009, pH of 5.0, moderate ketones, large glucose, and no protein.  There were no white cells or red cells present on exam.  Amylase was 101 U/L, theophylline level 13 μg/mL, Ca 10.3 mg/dL, albumin 4.6 g/dL, Alkaline phosphatase 85 IU/L, AST 15 U/L, Total Bilirubin 1.9 mg/dL (normal range 0-1.2 mg/dL), GGT 15 U/L.  Chest X-ray showed no infiltrate, and KUB showed no free air or abnormality.  The patient was admitted and hydrated.  He continued to have nausea and vomiting despite anti-emetics.  He also developed some abdominal pain, which he related to protracted vomiting.  Blood sugar finger sticks (acutest) were labile ranging from 50 to > 350.
